Arthropods — Assigned Segments Transcript
=========================================

This document contains the required BIO 152 viewing segments only: 0:00–8:10 and 41:20–43:45.

[0:00–8:10] Arthropod body plan, exoskeletons, and jointed appendages

0:00  So this is a really long section on protostomes. And we're looking at the phylum arthropoda, or arthropods. And poda means foot, and arthros means joint. So literally translated, jointed feet or jointed appendages. And so if you're looking at outcomes, look at the key features of arthropods. And then list four extent classes of arthropods and the characteristics that distinguish them from one another. So we're looking at subgroups here.

0:30  And then describe the advantages and drawbacks of an exoskeleton. So we're looking at the protostome clade, the ectasis ova, and right here is your arthropoda. And this is gonna be a rather large section, so we'll try to get through it as quickly as we can. Now, the author of your textbook uses a rank of class for this. And I'm gonna be referring to them as subphyla.

1:00  To be more consistent with the list I gave you for the laboratory. The name is still the same, we're just gonna elevate it to a rank above class, but still below a phylum. And so for the arthropoda, their characteristics, when we look at them, first of all, they're one of the most successful animal groups. And if we measure by the number of species that we know to exist, well over a million species, 1.2 million species, about

1:30  two thirds of all named species are arthropods. Arthropods do affect all aspects of human life, from being ectoparasites on them, to helping to pollinate crops and so on. So these are the extant classes of the arthropoda. Again, I'm gonna use the rank of subphyla, plural.

1:54  And so this would be not the class chelicerata, but subphyla chelicerata, crustacea. Hexapoda, which means six feet. And myriapoda, myriad, means many. Those are the centipedes and the millipedes. So again, we're gonna use the word class here. This is a nice quick summary of their major characteristics. You'll see a table like this in your lab manual here. You wanna go through this as a matter

2:23  of quickly reviewing some of the basic major characteristics for the groups. And then these are the common names, like spiders and scorpions for the chelicerata, lobsters and crabs and shrimp for crustacea. Hexapoda is actually more than just insects. There's a group within there called insect. And hexapoda, there's another group that has six legs as well, closely related to them. And then the myriapods there. So go ahead and make sure you look at that after you've gone through this material

2:51  as a matter of a quick summary for it. So here's a breakdown in a pie chart of all of the different arthropod groups. You can see, let's say we had 1 .2 million different arthropoda. Well, look at that big chunk there, that brown slice of the pie there are the beetles. 32% of them are beetles. That's one order. So you go to the classes, insect order. The beetles are the most diverse of a

3:21  group called the insects. So the insects start right here and go all the way to this yellow slice right here. Those are all insects. So the insects are the most abundant of the arthropods. Any of your crustaceans like Mr. Crabs, even plankton is probably a crustacean. The arachnids, the spiders, myriapods and other arthropods over here.

3:49  Now, looking at the arthropod success, part of it has to do with the evolution of their body plan and their exoskeleton and the segmentation that occurs. So segmentation, again, those review has evolved more than once in the animal kingdom. Segmentation didn't come from one ancestor. So different lines of animal evolution and you get segmentation like the earthworms have segmentation. So here, when we look at the exoskeleton,

4:17  we have segmentation and some of the segments are specialized in what they call tagma or tagmata. Like in this example, the grasshopper here. So segments get fused in together to form a head, which is a tagma. And then the thorax and then the abdomen. So this would be the head on that insect and the thorax right here, where all the walking legs originate from. And then the abdomen is that area back

4:44  here in the back there of the abdomen. Sometimes these tagma are fused further. So in some groups, you might get the head and the thorax fused together and that forms a cephalothorax. Cephala means head. And sometimes they're referred to that as prosoma.

5:04  Remember, I've mentioned this before a lot of times in my biology courses, the root word soma means body. And prosoma means in front of the body. Or before the body. The pro can have different meanings there. So prosoma. And so that's the segmentation. Then you have the exoskeleton and it's made of chitin, which is a complex protein carbohydrate

5:34  or complex carbohydrate and they have protein in there as well. That helps make up this, these sort of shield-like structures they have on the outside of their body. The exoskeleton does things like protect against water loss. If they get a bunch of nicks in the exoskeleton, they're gonna start having water evaporation from there. Another thing that it does is it provides protection, not just against water loss, but protects their vital organs. And the exoskeleton also provides, which is not on the list here, so just make note of that.

6:04  It provides a point for muscle attachment. So attachment of muscles, like within the legs and so on. Now the exoskeleton must be shed. So they go through ectasis, their ectasis zones in order to grow. And then they have jointed appendages and they come in pairs, these appendages. So every segment in, if we look at an ancestral arthropod, it just had many segments.

6:35  So I'm not drawing an earthworm here, but let's say this is an ancestor of all arthropods. The primitive form would have one pair of appendages coming out from every segment. That would be the ancestral form. So if you have six walking legs or three pairs, then that would suggest that three segments fused in the evolution of insects, for example. Some of these segments may become things like antennae. So let's say this is the head end

7:05  and the pair of segments, the first pair of segments there would be, I mean of appendages on that first segment would be antennae. Okay, so again, the appendages could be antennae, plural for antenna, mouthparts, wings, legs, or walking legs are appendages. Some of these appendages can be extended outward or retracted depending on what arthropod you're talking about. So here's a, it looks like some kind

7:34  of a bee. They're in a insect order called hymenoptera and you can see some of the features we've been talking about overall. They're surrounded by exoskeleton. Here, this case, insects have pair of wings. That's characteristic. There's your thorax head. They have eyes and some pair of antennae up here. Here we have six walking legs or three pairs of walking legs. And then in the abdomen, you're gonna have organs in the digestive system, reproductive system and

8:03  some other organs that are in there. It's gonna make note that they do have to get oxygen in and get rid of CO2 and they do so through little openings

[41:20–43:45] Metamorphosis

41:20  And it's associated with the tracheal system, so they can pick up sound waves and detect it in a sensory way. And then some do produce chemical signals that can signal other of their species. And in some cases, they're used for mating and they call those pheromones or marked trails like for ants when the scouts go out and they look for a food source.

41:46  The insect, many will go through a metamorphosis. So when we talk about life history is the strategy in which these insects go through their life cycle and reproduce and all the way through their entire lifespan. Some don't go through any sort of metamorphosis at all. There's actually some very, very fancy names for these. Overall, like homo, metabolo, metabolin. Well, holo means complete. Hemi means half, sort of.

42:15  And amelos mean none at all. Like these right here, silverfish, when they hatch, they look exactly like the adult. All they do is just molt and then grow a bigger version of themselves. And then your book says the simple metamorphosis, sometimes that's referred to as incomplete. And this is the hemimetabolin or basically like a half version of it. So incomplete, be aware. It may be called incomplete in other sources. And here, the young look like smaller versions of the adults, except they don't have the wings.

42:44  So these younger ones here are gonna be called nymphs. So they go through several stages of molts and growths. They molt, their exoskeletons soft, they grow. And then on their final molt, they become an adult and actually produce their wings here. And then you have holometabolin, which is a complete metamorphosis. Like butterflies, caterpillar, goes through pupal stage, cocoon forms, and then they come out as a butterfly. Same thing with this type of scary looking insect.

43:13  The larval stage looks way different than the adult. So that would be a complete metamorphosis. So it depends on what group of insects you're looking at. And then you have the myriapoda. And I found some video of myriapod centipede. These are carnivores here. And they have a pair of appendages on the anterior part that are modified to be able to inject venom. So they have a venom gland. And their bite can be pretty painful. And in some cases, small children can be

43:42  dangerous if you were to get bitten by them. But here they're showing different segment of videos
