Protostome Survey — Selected Review Clips Transcript
====================================================

This document contains the optional BIO 152 review clips only; it is not the full 96-minute lecture.

[0:00–4:35] Protostome clades overview

0:00  So this chapter we're going to look at the protostomes, which are the bilaterians, and on that image there is a picture of an arthropod, and arthropods close out the chapter. Here it's a dragonfly, and so we'll see those in the last section as phylum arthropodas. So looking at section one is an overview

0:29  of the clades of the protostomes, and so your learning outcome is to list the major clades of the protostomes and identify their distinguishing characteristics. So all the protostomes, so we were out over here to the left looking at sponges and ctenophores and cnidarians, which are radially symmetrical. Now we're over here with the bilateria. Now here those are protostomes, and then out here in this block here we have the deuterostomes, which will be the next chapter.

0:59  So here we got the protostomes, and you can see that in this edition of the book they broke them up into two clades, the Lophotrochozoa and the Ectozozoa. In the earlier book they actually had the Lophotrochozoa identified as spiralia, and then they had this group here which included the flatworms. You can see the common ancestor down here,

1:26  and they refer to those as the platyzoa, which literally translates to flat animals. And then this group out here with this common ancestor would have been a subclade, which was the actual Lophotrochozoa. So there was a significant change in the classification scheme that the author is using in the 12th edition than what they used in the prior edition, so that's something to be aware of.

1:55  So looking at the Lophotrochozoa now, which in the prior edition included both, which was part of the broader spiralia, and then there was the platyzoa. But they're all protostomes, so they're going to have spiral cleavage, which is something we covered in the prior chapter. And most are going to live in the water, and some are going to use cilia, or contractions of body musculature, to move around for their locomotion.

2:24  Now this is where this group gets its name, because not all members, this is more true of the Lophotrochozoa, that group earlier. So that would be right here, this group here. So not all of them, but within this group here, which again was formerly called the spiralia, the group gets its overall name because of characteristics that we see either in the

2:51  larval stage or in the mature stage. Some of them are going to have what's called trochophore larva, and the larva is free swimming, it looks like this. They're going to have this ring of cilia around the larval stage, and then it goes through a metamorphosis in terms of the adult form, but this trochophore is characteristic of it. And so you can see, you can see the gut here, there's a mouth here, and there's that green, the green outline area, there's the anus there at the end, so complete

3:21  gut. In others, they're going to have this characteristic lophophore, which is a horseshoe shaped crown that has tentacles that are ciliated. So you can see that over here, this is what we will call a bryozoa in a mature one, which like the Bryophora was the moss plants. This one literally translates to moss animals, a bryo for moss and then zoa for animal.

3:49  They are animals though, and you can see this horseshoe shaped structure with tentacles, and then there's cilia on there, and then their mouth is in there. So those tentacles and cilia help to bring food towards the mouth for feeding, they filter feed. So there's an image of them larger there. Looking at the other group, which was the Ectocysoa, and the Ectocysoa is this other group of protostomes out here.

4:17  And this group gets this name because the evidence seems to suggest that all of these guys, these groups, these phyla that we see listed here, share this common characteristic in that they shed. Ectocyst, ectocyst means to molt or to shed.

[29:15–31:15] Rotifers

29:15  And the phylum rotifera, which are the rotifers. These are microscopic animals. You can see the scale down here. This is in micrometers. They're really tiny animals. And you need magnification to see them. So for this section, your learning objective or outcome is to explain why rotifers are referred to as wheeled animals. There's more to it than that. But short answer to that one is that at their mouth area, they have this coronal structure, corona.

29:44  And it's lined with cilia to help it filter and bring food particles in. And when those cilia are moving, it looks like little wheels turning. So that's where they get their name from. They are bilaterally symmetrical. They do not have segments. And they are pseudocelomates. But some of the evidence suggests based on their morphology and some other bits of information

30:11  that their ancestors were probably acelomates like the flatworms. So the rotifers are there right within that subclade that the prior edition was calling the platyzoans. They do have highly developed internal organs. As you can see there, they have a complete gut digestive tract. They have this little foot or toe-like area here that they can use to attach to a substrate.

30:40  But they can move location if they want. That corona is why they're called the wheeled animals because the cilia I mentioned earlier, because of that cilia, which is used for locomotion and to sweep food. So if they detach from where they're hanging on, they can use the cilia to help them get around, along with a bit of body movement as well.

31:05  So just to show where they were on that cladogram, they were right there along with the same clade as the platychometes.

[66:15–71:30] Annelids

66:16  So now we are going to look at the Phylum annelidae and their annelids. These are commonly called the segmented worms. The formal name is Phylum annelidae. So you can see here is most of the genus Nereus. And you can see a lot of little segments all along the body there. So looking at the learning outcomes, number one is to explain how circular and longitudinal muscles.

66:44  They have muscles that run along their body and then those that go around the body.

66:50  And these segmented worms facilitate their movement. Then two distinguish between errantia and sedentaria. This is going to be something that I'll allow you to do if you have some time with your textbook. I'm not going to spend much time in some changes in the taxonomy right now just because it would take an extended amount of explanation as to what's been uncovered with more recent studies. So we're going to stick to a little

67:18  bit more traditional classification for now, especially in the laboratory. And then we'll make sure that occurs here for the lecture as well. Now these segments allow for these repeating units along the body. And within any given segment, you may have some specialization occur. So you might not have just one lung intestine, but now you'll have different sections of the digestive system. The group is not thought to be monophyletic overall.

67:47  That means sharing one common ancestor. And a third objective that I must have missed here, I just noticed that, is to describe the adaptations that leeches have for feeding off the blood of other animals. So they're ectoparasites. So here we are on our diagram here. We're still in this clade that the book referred to as the actual lophotrope zoans.

68:16  This one over here was the platyzoans. They're all protostomes to begin with. And so looking at the features of animals in general for their body planet, they do have a well-developed head. So there is cephalization here. They have a cerebral ganglion, which is their brain. And that's really what our brain is. It's just a big collection of nerve cells. And they're going to have sensory organs in

68:46  the ring-like segments. And many species do have eyes. The earthworm does not because it typically lives underground. The segments are going to be divided internally by septa. So these are going to be membranes that actually divide there. So here they cut off away from the wall of the earthworm there. And you see everywhere there's a segment right there and right there and right there. Within the body, there is a membrane that separates one segment of the body cavity from the next.

69:15  The body cavity is going to be filled with fluid. It's not hollow. But there are these membranes that wall off overall. So these segments are going to have their own sets of repeating organs. They're going to have their own nephritia, which are the excretory organs. They're going to have their own ganglion, which is like a little smaller collections of nerve cells. The main ganglion is the brain on the anterior end. And a locomotory structure within their muscle and

69:44  so on. They're going to have a closed circulatory system. And their nerve cord is ventral on the belly side. Ours is dorsal. Ours runs along our back, our spinal cord. So when you look here at this earthworm here, this is the anterior end. And here's the nerve cord right there. It's that yellow cord. So it's almost as if this earthworm sat up on the anterior end, just like you see here, is sitting upward, and then is leaning back like this. And there's where the nerve cord is.

70:14  So this is the ventral side. This would be the dorsal side. They have a ventral nerve cord, but they're going to have a dorsal and a ventral blood vessel. They're going to have these ring-like structures that connect the two vessels. And they sometimes refer to them as hearts, but they don't really provide a lot of force for moving around the blood within those blood vessels. And there's other mechanisms for doing that. So here I have a video of an earthworm actually moving.

70:43  And so that's something you're supposed to do in lab to study their motion. And you can see they alternate between stretching out and then shortening up. And that's accomplished with the help of two sets of muscles, longitudinal muscles that move along and then circular muscles that move around. The circular muscles actually pinch off areas of the body. And so that allows them to move their fluid around within. And they don't have bones or muscles pulling

71:12  on bones or any kind of skeletal plate-like structures. Instead, those muscles are pushing on the fluid within the body cavity. And that's referred to as a hydrostatic skeleton, which was mentioned in the earlier chapter when

[82:30–86:15] Lophophores: bryozoans and brachiopods

82:30  In this section, we're going to look at two different phyla, the phylum Bryozoa, which literally translates to moss animals, and then the brachiopods. The formal taxon is the phylum Brachiopoda. And so here, your outcomes are to describe the lophophore and its function. These are going to have lophophores in a mature animal. And we're going to distinguish between bryozoans and brachiopods, the two phyla that are grouped together here. They're mostly marine animals.

82:59  Both are characterized by having that lophophore. That lophophore, remember, is that U-shaped structure around the mouth or circular. It's going to have those tentacles with cilia. And there may be one to two rows of that. The function there is to help bring food particles in and for gas exchange, so for feeding and gas exchange. And this may be a case of convergent evolution. So the phylogeny with these groups is not certain on there.

83:28  So convergent evolution is when two different groups from two different branches of the evolutionary tree, two different ancestries, end up coming to having the same types of structures based on the environment they live in. Those pressures shaped and molded these individuals. So groups. So here they are. They're within that same clade that we've been looking at with the annulus, the mollus, and the lemur tia. We've gone through all of these already.

83:59  And so looking at the bryozoans, they're called the moss animals, just like the bryophyta would be the mosses, right? So they're small. They live in colonies. Their anus opens near the mouth. So you can see they're pointing to the anus here. And then the mouth is actually inside this area here where the lophophore is. And you can see a real picture here of a colony of them.

84:27  They do secrete this chitinous chamber. So chitin is that material found in the cell walls of fungi. You also find it in the exoskeleton of things like insects. And this chitinous chamber is called the zoetium. And so here's the zoetium here. And you can see the zoetium here, a colony of them there. And they actually have a muscle that allows them to withdraw themselves into the zoetium, suppose if there's danger around.

84:57  But they use that lophophore, that U-shaped or shoe-shaped tentacles, the cilia, to help get oxygen and get rid of CO2 and to help bring food in. Some may deposit calcium carbonate and help form reefs like the coral animals do. Asexual reproduction can occur frequently by budding.

85:21  And then we have the brachiopoda. These are sometimes called lamp shells or brachiopods. They kind of look like clams, but there's a difference here. The clam has left and right shells, whereas a brachiopod has a dorsal and ventral shell. So they have a top and bottom shell instead. And within the shells here, you can see the lophophores there within this area here. And the lophophores sit on top of part of the body. So here's part of the body there. You can see the gonads here, which are the sex organs.

85:51  You can see some muscles that help close the lamp here and the pedestal, which literally translates to the foot where they attach there. And they as well. And so these are the brachiopods. And then there's another closely related group. In this group here, I think there's maybe 15 species identified. They're called forinids, and they used to be
